KANCHIPURAM 

Kanchi District (Mandalam) in our Country (Bharath) 
is an important territory with manifestation of divine 
nature. It has an area of 400 Sq. miles. It is also known as 
Thondai Mandalam. It is bounded by the sacred shrines of 
Virinchipuram, Mahabalipuram, Devakipuram and 
Devapuram on its four sides. On its two sides are the 
rivers Payaswini (Palar) and the Dakshina Pinahini (South 
Pennaiar) which promote bhakti among the people. In the 
centre of these is the sacred city of Kanchipuram. 

This Kanchi shrine ( kshetra ) is one of the seven 
shrines* which confer spiritual liberation (Mukthi). The 
seven shrines are Ayodhya, Madurai, Maya, Kasi, Kanchi, 
Avanthi and Dwaraka. 

This shrine is extolled in Puranas as Brahmapuram 
and Dharmakshetram. It is blessed with the presence of 
thousands of Siva lingas. It is sanctified by various sacred 
waters such as Sivagangai, Umabhadhrai, Kambai etc. It 
has a sthalavriksha (sacred tree) of a mammoth divine 
mango tree which has stood through times of ancient 
deluge and which saved the great saint Markandeya. It is 
the seat of Sri Kamakshi Devi who is Srichakra Raja 
Devata and Mahathripurasundari, Sri Ekambaranathar 
and Sri Varadarja Perumal who are the saviours of many 
a soul. The layout of Kanchipuram reveals itself as the 
delineation of Srichakrapeetam of Parasakthi and is hailed 
as Chakrarajam. 

Srichakram has the Bindhu Swarupa in the middle 
the Sri Gurumandalas on its side and nine Avaranams on 
the periphery. In the same way the Kanchikshetra has at 
its centre the Bindhu sthana of Sri Kamakoti Peetam 
which is praised as Kamaraja Peetam, Bhooyoni and 
Pilakasam. On its side it has the Gurumandala with Lord 
Ekambaranathar, Brahma, Hasthivaradar, Hayagrivar, 
Bhrugu, Agastyar, Vyasar, Markandeyar and others. In 
the five surrounding Avaranas are Vikata Chakra 
Vinayaka, Kumara Bhagawan, Sri Krishna Bhagawan and 
other Deities as Avarana Devatas and as Beejaksharas. 
Further it has on all four sides temples and hundreds of 
dedicated villages as the 6th, 7th, 8th, 9th Avaranas and 
the Beejaksharas of respective Devathas up tc 
Bhoopuram. 

It is natural that divine incarnations (Avathara 
Purushas), Yogis, Siddhars, Gnanis flock to this town tc 
live there as the divine Trinity exist in their temples here 
and it resembles Sathyalokam, Vaikuntam and Kailasam. 

Accordingly our ancient Guru Sri Sankara Bhagawac 
Pada Swamiji resided in this town for some time after hi; 
countrywide tour. At that time he established here the Sr 
Kamaraja Peetam which is Chakrarajam to suit the 
conditions of the Kaliyuga. He also established c 
Gurupeetam here to protect the Vedic traditions fron 
being spoiled. From then on, the fame of the shrine go 
boosted. Thereafter considering this place as the seat o 
spiritual knowledge and centre of liberation (mukti) 
countless sages from many countries landed here like bee
being attracted to lotus flower. Thus this kshetra has 
excelled other such sacred towns in having great saints, 
sacred waters and images of divinity (Parabrahamam). 

Gurumandalam 

Gurumandalam means a congregation or circle of 
sathgurus (Spiritual masters). The word "Mandalam" also 
derives from the seating arrangement or the Gurus in a 
circle for doing puja to them. There are many such 
spiritual masters. All of these masters are Deities. These 
Deities appear in the world from time to time as Rishis, 
Avathara Purushas (Incarnations of God) depending on 
the nature of the conditions prevailing at the concerned 
time. Examples of such divine incarnations from time 
immemorial are Sriman Narayanar, Brahmadevar, 
Vasishtar, Sakthi, Parasarar, Vyasar, Sukar, Gaudapadhar, 
Govindar, Sri Sankarar, Padmapadhar, Hasthamalakar, 
Thodakar, Sureswarar, Anandagiri, Vachaspati, 
Amalanandar, Appayyadikshidar, Madhusudhana 
Saraswathi, Ramanandar, Bhaskararayar, 

Sadasivabrahamam and others. 

This Gurumandalam has three divisions namely 
Divya Oham, Siddha Oham and Maanava Oham. Sriman 
Narayanar and Brahmadevar belong to Divyaoham, the 
eight saints from Vasishta to Sri Sankara belong to 
Siddhaoham. The others belong to Maanavaoham. These 
three divisions are expressed as a significant part of 
Sri Vidya sampradayam (tradition) which is the best path 
for upasana (Spiritual Practice). 

Our Adiguru Sri Sankara occupies the central place in 
the gurumandalam. While he was in Kanchi for some 
time, he established the practice of Sri Vidya for the good 
of humanity. He considered that Sri Vidya was the basic 
aid in instilling the Advaita concept in people's mind.
Hence he taught many disciples the secrets, manthras and 
yanthras of Sri Vidya. He also wrote the book "Prabanja 
Saram" and "Saundarya Lahari" to publicise certain 
aspects of Sri Vidya. To symbolise Sri Vidhya as the 
foundation for Advaita practice, he wrote the "Trisathi 
Bhashyam". 

To foster among the people, devotion to Kamakshi 
Devi, Sri Vidyaswarupini, he laid down certain 
procedures for prayer. As the people in Kanchi did not 
possess the calibre to follow those procedures, he went to 
the banks of the Narmada river. From there he brought to 
Kanchipuram 30 devotees with their families, who were 
staunch followers of the Maanava Oham. He set them up 
at Kanchi to pursue systematically the Kriya yoga practice 
of Sri Kamakshi Devi. 

Those 30 Devi Bhakthas (devotees) performed with 
love the pujas for Sri Kamakshi Devi in the Sri Kamakoti 
Peetam exactly as per Adi Sankara's orders. As per the 
principle, "Karnath Karncrpadesena Sampraptham 
Avaneethalam ", from ear into ear, from ear into ear 
reaching the earth, from father to son, from teacher to 
disciple, they spread the practice of Sri Vidhya worship in 
the world. Since those days, devotion to Devi and 
concerned practices of worship started flourishing. They 
came to be known as "Kama Kotiyar" 

The Dynasty of Kamakotiyars 

Everyone born in the Kama Koti seat can be 
compared to Maharishis. All of them were experts in the 
four Vedas. They had knowledge of the Ithihasa-Puranas. 
They wrote several Smrithis. They conducted themselves 
in strict conformity to Vedic traditions. Maha 
Thripurasundari Sri Kamakshi Devi was their favourite 
family Deity. They had attained Siddhi in Sri Vidhya.
From any point of view they were classed as Sarvagyas 
(most accomplished). 

Of the 30 Kamakoti families, 10 belonged to 
Baurakutsa gothram, 10 to Kaundinya gothram and 10 to 
Kausika gothram. Of the 30 families, 15 families belonged 
to Ashtasahasra group and 15 were Vadamas. 

After 1200 A.D many of those families reduced in 
number and vanished because of the enormous inequities 
of Kali. Only two families belonging to Baurakutsa 
gothram and Kaundinya gothram survived. These two 
families staunchly adhered to their forefathers' 
perseverance and moral courage in spite of surrounding 
and mounting adharma. 

In those times the mandaladhipathis at 
Vijayanagaram, Vellore, Arcot, Tanjore etc. were of Rayar 
dynasty, Nayakar dynasty and Maharashtra dynasty. In 
each of these states, the ministers, priests (Gurus), and the 
state scholars (Vidwans) were from the respective 
dynasties and they occupied exalted position. As they had 
attained Sri Vidhya Siddhi, they had the power to confer 
boons and punishments. Further they were experts in 
astrological computations, Horai and Horoscopy. They 
were held in very high esteem by everyone. 

Among such famous persons were Josyam 
Subbarayar, Devaraja Josiar, Seshadri Josiar, 
Venkatramana Sastry, Kamakoti Sastry, and so on. After 
1500 A.D. as per the request of some Samasthana 
athipathis (Chieftains), they had to take up the task of 
reading panchanga (yearly almanac) in the premises of Sri 
Kanchi Vardaraja Perumal deity. From then on, they were 
awarded grants of land, housing, vehicles and servants. 
As per the requisites of these miraas endowments, they
accepted the signs and practices of Vaishnavas. 
Nevertheless their inherited proficiency in Sri Vidya 
Siddhi and Advaita experience did not undergo any 
decline. In this way many years passed by. Subsequent 
years saw conflicts between Saivites and Vaishnavites and 
hatred was spread. As a consequence strong objections 
were raised by die-hard Vaishnavaites against the 
Kamakoty dynasty members as they had not been 
otherwise initiated into the wearing of Vaishnava symbols 
on their body and prevented from officiating at the temple 
sannidhis. Therefore they lost their miraas endowments 
including land, etc. These families gave away whatever 
private wealth they had. They retained only two houses at 
Sivakanchi and Vishnukanchi as their ancestors' shelter. 
Even though they were leading life of householders, they 
had no sense of ownership and were happy and contented 
with whatever they got and lived like those who had 
renounced with ascetic nature as their mainstay. 

Sri Kamakoti Sastrigal 

At that time in South India, there were religious riots 
leading to the shaking of faith in God and cultural 
discipline declined. To stem the rot and regain the earlier 
cultural and religious moorings there was a need for a 
teacher with divine blessings. At that moment i.e. in the 
year 1790, a great soul by name Sri Kamakoti Sastrigal 
who had the benign Grace of Goddess Sri Kamakshi Devi 
came to be born into the Kamakoti dynasty. He had 
attained at a very young age Sri Vidya Siddhi as was wont 
with Kamakoti tradition. Owing to such 
"mahima ’(influence) he learnt in his early youth the 
Vedas, Puranas, Smrithis, religious debates (Tharkam), 
Vyakaranam, and Mimamsas. He thus earned the fame of
being an all knowing-Rishi. He could easily remove any 
doubts of anyone in the matter of Veda Sastras. He further 
had the attribute of a great Aahidhaagni (one who never 
failed to do his homa every day). 

He used to get up early in the morning and take his 
bath. He did the Gayathri japa a thousand times everyday. 
The rituals relating to agni (Homa) were carried out by 
him with deep interest. He performed all the religious 
rituals laid down by the Sastras without any let. One 
could write out the book of religious and spiritual 
discipline by describing his daily routine. Naturally he 
had hundreds of disciples who recited the Vedas and 
Sastras in his house. It reminded people about the 
atmosphere in the ancient rishis' homes in the distant 
past. Some of the pupils memorised the Vedas, some 
learnt the Sastras of justice, some recited the vedantas, 
some were engaged in performing homas, some were 
steeped in pujas to the deities and some were busy 
collecting the materials for doing such pujas. Thus the 
students of Sri Kamakoti Sastrigal exemplified in their 
lives good deeds and moral code of conduct. Their 
influence was responsible for removing religious 
controversies and indecent behaviour in South India. 

Another great personal asset with this great man was 
his proficiency in Divine music learnt from the Goddess 
herself as a mark of the Divine affection for him. During 
his pujas for Devi he used to sing Divine music from his 
heart. That music was such as to melt stone, promote 
flowering of plants and listeners would dance in Divine 
ecstasy. He used to teach music with all its bhava, raga, 
tala so that he came to be known as Bharatha Muni. He 
had composed hundreds of songs in praise of Lord Siva, 
Lord Narayana and Goddess Parasakthi. Some examples 
are given below: 

(1) Ragam - Ketharagowlam - Roopaka Talam - Pallavi 
Chitsabhanayakam , Chithabhaja Saambham 
Anupallavi 
Barjidhaanta Thamasam, Nijabhavyanatana jidhndurgam 
Bhaavidhasargam Bhargam (Chitsabha) 
Charanam 
Divyarathnaharinam,dheenathaapahaarinam, 
bhukti mukti 
Kaaranam, bhauya chaarinam, Kalmashaabahaarinam, 
Kavyabhishta smaranam, Kamakoti Sannutha Subha charanam 
Vilasathkarunam, Munijana hrudhaya viharanam (Chitsabha) 

(2) Bhairavi Ragam, Roopaka Talam 
Pallavi 
Ramaapathe sadhanathe dhayaam mayi pradeesa (Rama) 
Anupallavi 
Sumaanasaabhirama maamavaanicam, sadhaya hrudhaya 
(Rama) 
Charanam 
1. Saamodha Hrishikesa, Chidanandha Murare, Hrudhi 
bhoomodhaya maapaadhaya, damodara, bheemarchitha 
(Rama)
2. Saamajavarathaamalaguna, Somavathana 
Kaamapalatharaama, Sumaradhana, Kanaakanaa bhajaya 
(Rama) 

3. Saadhithadikpaala madhapraabhavasam raavana 
Vithraavana hridbhedha Siraschedhana thoureya vibho 
(Rama) 

4. Ilaa jalaa nilaa, nalaam parenthu 
bhanumandalojwala kalaabha, bhaavitha 
sridhakamakoti nutha, Sri ramana karunaalaya 
sudhaa sathursa mridhuvachana, puraarimuka 
vinudha paatha, Kribhaakaraacyutha, suguna, 
saroruhekshana, sujanana, sadasraya, 

Asuradhamana, Nirupama susaridhaavaramava, 
Maamakunda Garuda gamana (Rama) 

(3) Ragam - Madhyamavathi * Talam Adi 

Pallavi 

Ambasive bhavathee mupaase (Amba) 

Anupallavi 

Sambhara vairi haraanganivace (Amba) 

Charanam 

Ambhuja bhava Vishnupujithaasi, digambara mabhi 
saambhara 

maagalayaci, Thumbhuru muka gaanalole, 
bhaalakusaamba, 

sankari, nibheetha kaadhambhari (Amba) 
siddha nichaya maanasaam bhujaatha nibhathapathe, 
suradhe, varadhe, sandiktha mabhipaathaarthamaacu 
bhasaya, varthayamama bhuthima mridha sambhaashini 
(Amba) 

Paamara narasanga mathradhooraya, Sri madangri 
Sevinam, suseelaya, thaamarasadhalaakshi, Kameswari, 
Kamakoti vaakkadhamba sathkehini (Ambasive) 
In Telugu there are a number of kirthanas like 
"Nirupamaanathe jomayam”. They are not given here for 
want of space. 

There was in the town of Tiruppakkuzi one great 
Vaishnavite by name Appa who was an intimate friend of 
Sri Kamakoti Sastrigal. Appa was well versed in four 
sastras. He also had many disciples. He has also written 
many books. Even though he was in no way inferior to 
Sastrigal, he used to appreciate and praise Kamakoti 
Mahan for his various writings and Kirthans. Thus Sastri 
Mahan was praised by all and was like a Tilak in the 
entire South India. He was often invited to other towns so 
that people could imbibe his devotion, obtain his 
initiation, listen to his sermons. For that purpose some 
friends had invited him to a village called "Vazur". Vazur 
is in Wandawasi Taluk. It was not thickly populated and 
was like a Tapovan (full of forests). He settled down for 
the rest of his life in that village and the villagers arranged 
a residence for him there. Even though Sri Kamakoti 
Sastrigal was born in Kanchi he lived a greater part of his 
life in Vazhur. 

Sri Kamakoti Sastrigal belonged to Kaundinya 
gothram. He had no male issue and was blessed with a 
daughter Seshammal. Nevertheless he treated his elder 
brother Chidambara Sastrigal's children as his own 
children. Sri Chidambara Sastrigal had two sons and two 
daughters one of whom was Maragatham (vide family 
tree on page 16). 

Maragatham 

Maragatham was endowed with a natural beauty, 
sharp perception, upright conduct. Her supremacy in 
knowledge made people remark that she was an Amsam 
of Goddess Sri Kamakshi Devi. Thus Sri Kamakoti
Sastrigal showered his affection more on this child than 
on others. He taught her the epics, drama, alankaras and 
music. By her 12th year the child earned the title of 
Sahitya Sangeetha Kalaavathi. Her devotional songs were 
sung with such intense involvement and sonorons voice 
that even a withered tree would grow, the learned as well 
as the ignorant masses would be stunned into absorption. 
The people anticipated that some great good would 
accrue from this accomplished lady. 

Marriage of Maragatham 

When she attained the age of marriage, Sri Kamakoti 
Sastrigal fixed a suitable match by name Varadarajar 
belonging to Bourakutsa gothra of the same Kamakoti 
vamsa. He was very handsome and well learned in the 
Sastras and at a young age he had obtained the Sri Vidya 
Siddhi. He was a personification of good conduct and 
treated his mother, father and teacher as God. He was in 
the company of great men. True to his name, he had the 
reputation to be considered as an Amsam of Lord 
Varadaraja. Thus Varadarajar and Maragatham were 
considered matching each other like Sri Rama and Seetha. 
Accordingly Varadarajar's father Seshadri Josiar was 
approached for giving his son the hands of Maragatham 
in matrimony. On his agreement, steps were taken to 
celebrate the marriage. To seek the divine grace of 
Goddess Kamakshi, puja was done to Suhasinis. To 
invoke the blessings of Lord Venkateswara appropriate 
puja was done to couples and Brahmins. The prasadams 
from various temples in Kanchi were also received. The 
marriage ceremony between Varadaraja and Maragatham 
lasted seven days with all splendour and gaiety common 
at that time. 

Family Life 

Maragatham treated her husband as God and served 
him like Goddess Parvathi. Everyday before sunrise she 
used to wake up and circumambulate her husband three 
times. She used to clean the house and take her bath. She 
worshipped the cow daily and plucked flowers required 
for puja. Even though there were many youngsters to do 
the preliminaries for puja, she vied with them and 
participated in the daily puja done by her husband. She 
recited Soundarya Lahari and Mookapanchasathy for 
worshipping the Goddess. She used to sing the hymns 
composed by her father in praise of the deity with deep 
devotion and forgetfulness of self. After the divine 
offering was completed she fed her husband and other 
guests with tasty food. In the afternoon she used to read 
aloud for the benefit of her husband the various Puranas. 
After performing the evening routines she used to go with 
her husband to worship Goddess Sri Kamakshi Devi and 
God Sri Ekambaranathar at the temples and return home. 
Thereafter there was feeding the poor and feeding of her 
husband. She smeared sandal paste on her husband's feet 
and showered flower petals thereon. As she went to sleep 
after him and woke up before him Sri Varadarajar never 
saw his wife asleep. Maragatham adhered to this strict 
daily routine without fail. 

To learn various Sastras from Sri Varadarajar, many 
students from other towns flocked to his house to reside 
there. They mostly learnt the subject of astrology from 
him. In astrology, Sri Varadarajar was the equivalent of 
Garga Maharishi. His ability to teach and give predictions 
could only be matched by Rishis and not by ordinary 
mortals. As there was none in his dynasty who uttered 
any falsehood, anything predicted by him would turn out 
to be true. The entire class was given the title of Josiars
(astrologers) and accordingly he was also known as 
Varadaraja Josiar. He had a younger brother by name 
Ramaswamy Josiar. He matched his elder brother in his 
traits, nature and competence. Both the brothers lived as 
one family in perfect amity. 

Sri Varadaraja Josiar lived with his devoted wife 
without violating any injunctions of the sastras. Seeing 
their harmony and nature and code of conduct, the people 
of Kanchi praised them as Lord Parameswara and Devi 
Parvathi or as the couple Arundhathi and Vasishta. This 
era continued for quite some years. 

The couple never experienced any illness, wants and 
had abundant wealth. But they did not have any child. 
This was a cause of acute anxiety to them. Thus 
Varadarajar thought one day ''Our clan may die without a 
successor, or ancestors have not showered their blessings, 
we don't know what the family deity has ordained or may 
be our previous misdeeds cannot be compensated". 
Therefore he started observing certain penances to nullify 
the evil effects. Both husband and wife went on a 
pilgrimage to Rameswaram (Sethu) and gave away 
charities and performed homa as laid down in Sastras. 
They went on a number of pilgrimages, observed fasts 
and devoted their time to divine prayers. They also 
observed fasts on auspicious shashti days and fasts 
devoted to Lord Karthikeya (Kumara Vridham). All these 
did not bear fruit. Seeing the plight of the couple, Sri 
Kamakoti Sastrigal himself pleaded with his family deity 
with intense piety. One day heeding the devotee's prayers 
the Goddess of Chakra, Sri Kamakshi Devi appeared in 
his dream and told him "Give Navaneetham and there 
will arise a blaze of knowledge". He woke up with great 
delight and praised the Goddess Parasakthi with all his 
fervour. Next morning after his usual ablutions and 
devotional routine, he divulged the injunctions of the 
Goddess to his dear daughter and her husband. On 
hearing this, the couple prostrated at his feet and praised 
the Goddess Parasakti. Then the great learned one, gave 
his daughter and son-in-law butter from cow's milk after 
due incantations of the manthras of the Goddess. 
Thereupon the grace of the Goddess manifested itself to 
the couple very soon. Maragatham conceived. The 
conception proceeded like the growing full moon to the 
happiness of the people. Various religious ceremonies 
enjoined for the development of pregnancy were 
performed appropriately. The maturing of the process 
was keenly looked forward to by near and dear.

Swamigal's Avathar 

In due course the sun attained the Northern solstice 
and there was prosperity in the world around: The skies 
appeared spotlessly clear; Rivers and ponds became 
crystal clear like the minds of the learned elders. Paddy 
crops bent their heads like learned sages. Wherever one 
turned the air of prosperity was evident. There was the 
boom of bugles in the temples. There was the sound of 
auspicious music in the homes. The stars in the sky were 
shining in harmony. The Goddess Kamakshi Devi was 
very pleased. The day was Thai, waning moon Sashti, 
Saturday in the year Sukla. The star was Hastam. Mahan 
Sri Seshadri was born at the early hour of that auspicious 
day to the blessed Maragathammal. The child was like a 
golden doll full of beauty. Music instruments played 
sonorous songs. The ladies sang auspicious songs by 
singing hymns in praise of Goddess and bathing in sacred 
waters. Sumangalis (auspicious ladies) brought 
auspicious gifts. Chidambara Sastrigal and Kamakoti 
Sastrigal were happy that the Vamsa would flourish. 
Countless acts of charity were done. The entire Kanchi 
town evinced immense joy. Keeping in view that the child 
was bom on a Saturday, pleasing to Lord Srinivasa and 
the name of their ancestor, the child was named 
"Seshadri" at an auspicious time and the horoscope duly 
compiled. 

The entire district of Kanchi turned up to see the 
newborn. Some said that the child was gandharva, others 
said it resembled the full moon; some thought the child 
was like Manmatha; some people said that the child was 
the pet child of Goddess Sri Kamakshi Devi. They said 
that he was bom because of the parent's tapas, that he was 
the ornament of Sri Kamakshi Devi. For one whole month 
after the child's birth, there were festive celebrations.

Swamiji's Horoscope 

The birth was on 22nd January 1870, the year 4970 of 
Kaliyuga Sukla year, Thai 11th Saturday Panchami 14-28 
uthiram 13-5 after that Hastam early 11-57 Thai 14-23 Ra 
11-17 udayaadhi nazhigai 56 1/8, Dhanur Lagnam Thula 
Navaamsam Hastham aadhyantham 56-nazhigai. Balance 
in Chandradasa 2 years and 3 months.  
